Guide/src/reference/architecture/openhcl/boot.md, before:

# OpenHCL Boot Flow

This document describes the sequence of events that occur when OpenHCL boots, from the initial loading of the IGVM package to the fully running paravisor environment.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    autonumber
    participant Host as Host VMM
    box "VTL2 (OpenHCL)" #f9f9f9
        participant Shim as Boot Shim<br/>(openhcl_boot)
        participant Sidecar as Sidecar Kernel
        participant Kernel as Linux Kernel
        participant Init as Init<br/>(underhill_init)
        participant HCL as Paravisor<br/>(openvmm_hcl)
        participant Worker as VM Worker<br/>(underhill_vm)
    end
    
    Host->>Shim: 1. Load IGVM & Transfer Control
    activate Shim
    
    note over Shim: 2. Boot Shim Execution<br/>Hardware Init, Config Parse, Device Tree
    
    par CPU Split
        Shim->>Sidecar: APs Jump to Sidecar
        activate Sidecar
        note over Sidecar: Enter Dispatch Loop
        
        Shim->>Kernel: BSP Jumps to Kernel Entry
        deactivate Shim
        activate Kernel
    end
    
    note over Kernel: 3. Linux Kernel Boot<br/>Init Subsystems, Load Drivers, Mount initrd
    
    Kernel->>Init: Spawn PID 1
    deactivate Kernel
    activate Init
    
    note over Init: 4. Userspace Initialization<br/>Mount /proc, /sys, /dev
    
    Init->>HCL: Exec openvmm_hcl
    deactivate Init
    activate HCL
    
    note over HCL: 5. Paravisor Startup<br/>Read Device Tree, Init Services
    
    HCL->>Worker: Spawn Worker
    activate Worker
    
    par 6. VM Execution
        note over HCL: Manage Policy & Host Comm
        note over Worker: Run VTL0 VP Loop
        note over Sidecar: Wait for Commands / Hotplug
    end
```

## 1. IGVM Loading

The boot process begins when the host VMM loads the OpenHCL IGVM package into VTL2 memory.
The IGVM package contains the initial code and data required to start the paravisor, including the boot shim, kernel, and initial ramdisk.
The host places these components at specific physical addresses defined in the IGVM header and carries the configuration blob (parameters and optional host device tree) into VTL2.

## 2. Boot Shim Execution (`openhcl_boot`)

The host transfers control to the entry point of the **Boot Shim**.

1. **Hardware Init:** The shim initializes the CPU state and memory management unit (MMU).
2. **Config Parsing:** It parses configuration from multiple sources:
    * **IGVM Parameters:** Fixed parameters provided by the host that were generated at IGVM build time.
    * **Host Device Tree:** A device tree provided by the host containing topology and resource information.
    * **Command Line:** It parses the kernel command line, which can be supplied via IGVM or the host device tree.
3. **Device Tree:** It constructs a Device Tree that describes the hardware topology (CPUs, memory) to the Linux kernel.
4. **Sidecar Setup (x86_64):** The shim determines which CPUs will run Linux (typically just the BSP) and which will run the Sidecar (APs). It sets up control structures and directs Sidecar CPUs to the Sidecar entry point.
    * **Sidecar Entry:** "Sidecar CPUs" jump directly to the Sidecar kernel entry point instead of the Linux kernel.
    * **Dispatch Loop:** These CPUs enter a lightweight dispatch loop, waiting for commands.
5. **Kernel Handoff:** Finally, the BSP (and any Linux APs) jumps to the Linux kernel entry point, passing the Device Tree and command line arguments.

## 3. Linux Kernel Boot

The **Linux Kernel** takes over on the BSP and initializes the operating system environment. Sidecar CPUs remain in their dispatch loop until needed (e.g., hot-plugged for Linux tasks).

1. **Kernel Init:** The kernel initializes its subsystems (memory, scheduler, etc.).
2. **Driver Init:** It loads drivers for the paravisor hardware and standard devices.
3. **Root FS:** It mounts the initial ramdisk (initrd) as the root filesystem.
4. **Expose DT:** It exposes the boot-time Device Tree to userspace (e.g., under `/proc/device-tree`) for early consumers.
4. **User Space:** It spawns the first userspace process, `underhill_init` (PID 1).

## 4. Userspace Initialization (`underhill_init`)

`underhill_init` prepares the userspace environment.

1. **Filesystems:** It mounts essential pseudo-filesystems like `/proc`, `/sys`, and `/dev`.
2. **Environment:** It sets up environment variables and system limits.
3. **Exec:** It replaces itself with the main paravisor process, `/bin/openvmm_hcl`.

## 5. Paravisor Startup (`openvmm_hcl`)

The **Paravisor** process (`openvmm_hcl`) starts and initializes the virtualization services.

1. **Config Discovery:** It reads the system topology and configuration from `/proc/device-tree` and other kernel interfaces.
2. **Service Init:** It initializes internal services, such as the VTL0 management logic and host communication channels.
3. **Worker Spawn:** It spawns the **VM Worker** process (`underhill_vm`) to handle the high-performance VM partition loop.

## 6. VM Execution

At this point, the OpenHCL environment is fully established.
The `underhill_vm` process runs the VTL0 guest, handling exits and emulating devices, while `openvmm_hcl` manages the overall policy and communicates with the host.

Commit message:

incorporate out of proc emulators

Guide/src/reference/architecture/openhcl/boot.md, after:

# OpenHCL Boot Flow

This document describes the sequence of events that occur when OpenHCL boots, from the initial loading of the IGVM package to the fully running paravisor environment.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    autonumber
    participant Host as Host VMM
    box "VTL2 (OpenHCL)" #f9f9f9
        participant Shim as Boot Shim<br/>(openhcl_boot)
        participant Sidecar as Sidecar Kernel
        participant Kernel as Linux Kernel
        participant Init as Init<br/>(underhill_init)
        participant HCL as Paravisor<br/>(openvmm_hcl)
        participant Worker as VM Worker<br/>(underhill_vm)
        participant DeviceWorker as Device Workers<br/>(e.g., TPM)
    end
    
    Host->>Shim: 1. Load IGVM & Transfer Control
    activate Shim
    
    note over Shim: 2. Boot Shim Execution<br/>Hardware Init, Config Parse, Device Tree
    
    par CPU Split
        Shim->>Sidecar: APs Jump to Sidecar
        activate Sidecar
        note over Sidecar: Enter Dispatch Loop
        
        Shim->>Kernel: BSP Jumps to Kernel Entry
        deactivate Shim
        activate Kernel
    end
    
    note over Kernel: 3. Linux Kernel Boot<br/>Init Subsystems, Load Drivers, Mount initrd
    
    Kernel->>Init: Spawn PID 1
    deactivate Kernel
    activate Init
    
    note over Init: 4. Userspace Initialization<br/>Mount /proc, /sys, /dev
    
    Init->>HCL: Exec openvmm_hcl
    deactivate Init
    activate HCL
    
    note over HCL: 5. Paravisor Startup<br/>Read Device Tree, Init Services
    
    HCL->>Worker: Spawn Worker
    activate Worker
    
    Worker->>DeviceWorker: Spawn Device Workers (as needed)
    activate DeviceWorker
    
    par 6. VM Execution
        note over HCL: Manage Policy & Host Comm
        note over Worker: Run VTL0 VP Loop,<br/>Proxy Device I/O
        note over DeviceWorker: Emulate Isolated Devices
        note over Sidecar: Wait for Commands / Hotplug
    end
```

## 1. IGVM Loading

The boot process begins when the host VMM loads the OpenHCL IGVM package into VTL2 memory.
The IGVM package contains the initial code and data required to start the paravisor, including the boot shim, kernel, and initial ramdisk.
The host places these components at specific physical addresses defined in the IGVM header and carries the configuration blob (parameters and optional host device tree) into VTL2.

## 2. Boot Shim Execution (`openhcl_boot`)

The host transfers control to the entry point of the **Boot Shim**.

1. **Hardware Init:** The shim initializes the CPU state and memory management unit (MMU).
2. **Config Parsing:** It parses configuration from multiple sources:
    * **IGVM Parameters:** Fixed parameters provided by the host that were generated at IGVM build time.
    * **Host Device Tree:** A device tree provided by the host containing topology and resource information.
    * **Command Line:** It parses the kernel command line, which can be supplied via IGVM or the host device tree.
3. **Device Tree:** It constructs a Device Tree that describes the hardware topology (CPUs, memory) to the Linux kernel.
4. **Sidecar Setup (x86_64):** The shim determines which CPUs will run Linux (typically just the Bootstrap Processor (BSP)) and which will run the Sidecar (APs). It sets up control structures and directs Sidecar CPUs to the Sidecar entry point.
    * **Sidecar Entry:** "Sidecar CPUs" jump directly to the Sidecar kernel entry point instead of the Linux kernel.
    * **Dispatch Loop:** These CPUs enter a lightweight dispatch loop, waiting for commands.
5. **Kernel Handoff:** Finally, the BSP (and any Linux APs) jumps to the Linux kernel entry point, passing the Device Tree and command line arguments.

## 3. Linux Kernel Boot

The **Linux Kernel** takes over on the BSP and initializes the operating system environment. Sidecar CPUs remain in their dispatch loop until needed (e.g., hot-plugged for Linux tasks).

1. **Kernel Init:** The kernel initializes its subsystems (memory, scheduler, etc.).
2. **Driver Init:** It loads drivers for the paravisor hardware and standard devices.
3. **Root FS:** It mounts the initial ramdisk (initrd) as the root filesystem.
4. **Expose DT:** It exposes the boot-time Device Tree to userspace (e.g., under `/proc/device-tree`) for early consumers.
4. **User Space:** It spawns the first userspace process, `underhill_init` (PID 1).

## 4. Userspace Initialization (`underhill_init`)

`underhill_init` prepares the userspace environment.

1. **Filesystems:** It mounts essential pseudo-filesystems like `/proc`, `/sys`, and `/dev`.
2. **Environment:** It sets up environment variables and system limits.
3. **Exec:** It replaces itself with the main paravisor process, `/bin/openvmm_hcl`.

## 5. Paravisor Startup (`openvmm_hcl`)

The **Paravisor** process (`openvmm_hcl`) starts and initializes the virtualization services.

1. **Config Discovery:** It reads the system topology and configuration from `/proc/device-tree` and other kernel interfaces.
2. **Service Init:** It initializes internal services, such as the VTL0 management logic and host communication channels.
3. **Worker Spawn:** It spawns the **VM Worker** process (`underhill_vm`) to handle the high-performance VM partition loop.

## 6. VM Execution

At this point, the OpenHCL environment is fully established.

The `underhill_vm` process runs the VTL0 guest, handling exits and coordinating device emulation. During VM initialization, security-sensitive devices requiring isolation (such as the virtual TPM) are spawned as dedicated **device worker processes** that run the emulation logic in separate, sandboxed processes. The VM worker proxies I/O operations and guest memory accesses between the guest and these isolated device emulators.

Meanwhile, `openvmm_hcl` manages the overall policy and communicates with the host.
